# Условные обозначения

5.1 Syntactic and Lexical Grammars
==================================

5.1.1 Context-Free Grammars
===========================

A _context-free grammar_ consists of a number of _productions_. Each production has an abstract symbol called a _nonterminal_ as its _left-hand side_, and a sequence of zero or more nonterminal and _terminal_ symbols as its _right-hand side_. For each grammar, the terminal symbols are drawn from a specified alphabet.

A chain production is a production that has exactly one nonterminal symbol on its right-hand side along with zero or more terminal symbols.

Starting from a sentence consisting of a single distinguished nonterminal, called the goal symbol, a given context-free grammar specifies a _language_, namely, the (perhaps infinite) set of possible sequences of terminal symbols that can result from repeatedly replacing any nonterminal in the sequence with a right-hand side of a production for which the nonterminal is the left-hand side.

5.1.2 The Lexical and RegExp Grammars
=====================================

A _lexical grammar_ for ECMAScript is given in clause [12](ecmascript-language-lexical-grammar.html#sec-ecmascript-language-lexical-grammar). This grammar has as its terminal symbols Unicode code points that conform to the rules for [SourceCharacter](ecmascript-language-source-code.html#prod-SourceCharacter) defined in [11.1](ecmascript-language-source-code.html#sec-source-text). It defines a set of productions, starting from the [goal symbol](notational-conventions.html#sec-context-free-grammars) [InputElementDiv](ecmascript-language-lexical-grammar.html#prod-InputElementDiv), [InputElementTemplateTail](ecmascript-language-lexical-grammar.html#prod-InputElementTemplateTail), [InputElementRegExp](ecmascript-language-lexical-grammar.html#prod-InputElementRegExp), [InputElementRegExpOrTemplateTail](ecmascript-language-lexical-grammar.html#prod-InputElementRegExpOrTemplateTail), or [InputElementHashbangOrRegExp](ecmascript-language-lexical-grammar.html#prod-InputElementHashbangOrRegExp), that describe how sequences of such code points are translated into a sequence of input elements.

Input elements other than white space and comments form the terminal symbols for the syntactic grammar for ECMAScript and are called ECMAScript _tokens_. These tokens are the [reserved words](ecmascript-language-lexical-grammar.html#sec-keywords-and-reserved-words), identifiers, literals, and punctuators of the ECMAScript language. Moreover, line terminators, although not considered to be tokens, also become part of the stream of input elements and guide the process of automatic semicolon insertion ([12.10](ecmascript-language-lexical-grammar.html#sec-automatic-semicolon-insertion)). Simple white space and single-line comments are discarded and do not appear in the stream of input elements for the syntactic grammar. A [MultiLineComment](ecmascript-language-lexical-grammar.html#prod-MultiLineComment) (that is, a comment of the form `/*`…`*/` regardless of whether it spans more than one line) is likewise simply discarded if it contains no line terminator; but if a [MultiLineComment](ecmascript-language-lexical-grammar.html#prod-MultiLineComment) contains one or more line terminators, then it is replaced by a single line terminator, which becomes part of the stream of input elements for the syntactic grammar.

A _RegExp grammar_ for ECMAScript is given in [22.2.1](text-processing.html#sec-patterns). This grammar also has as its terminal symbols the code points as defined by [SourceCharacter](ecmascript-language-source-code.html#prod-SourceCharacter). It defines a set of productions, starting from the [goal symbol](notational-conventions.html#sec-context-free-grammars) [Pattern](text-processing.html#prod-Pattern), that describe how sequences of code points are translated into regular expression patterns.

Productions of the lexical and RegExp grammars are distinguished by having two colons “**::**” as separating punctuation. The lexical and RegExp grammars share some productions.

5.1.3 The Numeric String Grammar
================================

A _numeric string grammar_ appears in [7.1.4.1](abstract-operations.html#sec-tonumber-applied-to-the-string-type). It has as its terminal symbols [SourceCharacter](ecmascript-language-source-code.html#prod-SourceCharacter), and is used for translating Strings into numeric values starting from the [goal symbol](notational-conventions.html#sec-context-free-grammars) [StringNumericLiteral](abstract-operations.html#prod-StringNumericLiteral) (which is similar to but distinct from the [lexical grammar for numeric literals](ecmascript-language-lexical-grammar.html#sec-literals-numeric-literals)).

Productions of the numeric string grammar are distinguished by having three colons “**:::**” as punctuation, and are never used for parsing source text.

5.1.4 The Syntactic Grammar
===========================

The _syntactic grammar_ for ECMAScript is given in clauses [13](ecmascript-language-expressions.html#sec-ecmascript-language-expressions) through [16](ecmascript-language-scripts-and-modules.html#sec-ecmascript-language-scripts-and-modules). This grammar has ECMAScript tokens defined by the lexical grammar as its terminal symbols ([5.1.2](notational-conventions.html#sec-lexical-and-regexp-grammars)). It defines a set of productions, starting from two alternative [goal symbols](notational-conventions.html#sec-context-free-grammars) [Script](ecmascript-language-scripts-and-modules.html#prod-Script) and [Module](ecmascript-language-scripts-and-modules.html#prod-Module), that describe how sequences of tokens form syntactically correct independent components of ECMAScript programs.

When a stream of code points is to be parsed as an ECMAScript [Script](ecmascript-language-scripts-and-modules.html#prod-Script) or [Module](ecmascript-language-scripts-and-modules.html#prod-Module), it is first converted to a stream of input elements by repeated application of the lexical grammar; this stream of input elements is then parsed by a single application of the syntactic grammar. The input stream is syntactically in error if the tokens in the stream of input elements cannot be parsed as a single instance of the goal nonterminal ([Script](ecmascript-language-scripts-and-modules.html#prod-Script) or [Module](ecmascript-language-scripts-and-modules.html#prod-Module)), with no tokens left over.

When a parse is successful, it constructs a _parse tree_, a rooted tree structure in which each node is a Parse Node. Each Parse Node is an _instance_ of a symbol in the grammar; it represents a span of the source text that can be derived from that symbol. The root node of the parse tree, representing the whole of the source text, is an instance of the parse's [goal symbol](notational-conventions.html#sec-context-free-grammars). When a Parse Node is an instance of a nonterminal, it is also an instance of some production that has that nonterminal as its left-hand side. Moreover, it has zero or more _children_, one for each symbol on the production's right-hand side: each child is a Parse Node that is an instance of the corresponding symbol.

New Parse Nodes are instantiated for each invocation of the parser and never reused between parses even of identical source text. Parse Nodes are considered the same Parse Node if and only if they represent the same span of source text, are instances of the same grammar symbol, and resulted from the same parser invocation.

Note 1

Parsing the same String multiple times will lead to different Parse Nodes. For example, consider:

    let str = "1 + 1;";
    eval(str);
    eval(str);

Each call to `eval` converts the value of `str` into [ECMAScript source text](ecmascript-language-source-code.html#sec-source-text) and performs an independent parse that creates its own separate tree of Parse Nodes. The trees are distinct even though each parse operates upon a source text that was derived from the same String value.

Note 2

Parse Nodes are specification artefacts, and implementations are not required to use an analogous data structure.

Productions of the syntactic grammar are distinguished by having just one colon “**:**” as punctuation.

The syntactic grammar as presented in clauses [13](ecmascript-language-expressions.html#sec-ecmascript-language-expressions) through [16](ecmascript-language-scripts-and-modules.html#sec-ecmascript-language-scripts-and-modules) is not a complete account of which token sequences are accepted as a correct ECMAScript [Script](ecmascript-language-scripts-and-modules.html#prod-Script) or [Module](ecmascript-language-scripts-and-modules.html#prod-Module). Certain additional token sequences are also accepted, namely, those that would be described by the grammar if only semicolons were added to the sequence in certain places (such as before line terminator characters). Furthermore, certain token sequences that are described by the grammar are not considered acceptable if a line terminator character appears in certain “awkward” places.

In certain cases, in order to avoid ambiguities, the syntactic grammar uses generalized productions that permit token sequences that do not form a valid ECMAScript [Script](ecmascript-language-scripts-and-modules.html#prod-Script) or [Module](ecmascript-language-scripts-and-modules.html#prod-Module). For example, this technique is used for object literals and object destructuring patterns. In such cases a more restrictive _supplemental grammar_ is provided that further restricts the acceptable token sequences. Typically, an [early error](error-handling-and-language-extensions.html#early-error) rule will then state that, in certain contexts, "P must cover an N", where P is a Parse Node (an instance of the generalized production) and N is a nonterminal from the supplemental grammar. This means:

1.  The sequence of tokens originally matched by P is parsed again using N as the [goal symbol](notational-conventions.html#sec-context-free-grammars). If N takes grammatical parameters, then they are set to the same values used when P was originally parsed.
2.  If the sequence of tokens can be parsed as a single instance of N, with no tokens left over, then:
    1.  We refer to that instance of N (a Parse Node, unique for a given P) as "the N that is covered by P".
    2.  All Early Error rules for N and its derived productions also apply to the N that is covered by P.
3.  Otherwise (if the parse fails), it is an early Syntax Error.

5.1.5 Grammar Notation
======================

5.1.5.1 Terminal Symbols
========================

In the ECMAScript grammars, some terminal symbols are shown in `fixed-width` font. These are to appear in a source text exactly as written. All terminal symbol code points specified in this way are to be understood as the appropriate Unicode code points from the Basic Latin block, as opposed to any similar-looking code points from other Unicode ranges. A code point in a terminal symbol cannot be expressed by a `\` [UnicodeEscapeSequence](ecmascript-language-lexical-grammar.html#prod-UnicodeEscapeSequence).

In grammars whose terminal symbols are individual Unicode code points (i.e., the lexical, RegExp, and numeric string grammars), a contiguous run of multiple fixed-width code points appearing in a production is a simple shorthand for the same sequence of code points, written as standalone terminal symbols.

For example, the production:

[HexIntegerLiteral](notational-conventions.html#prod-grammar-notation-HexIntegerLiteral) :: 0x [HexDigits](ecmascript-language-lexical-grammar.html#prod-HexDigits)

is a shorthand for:

[HexIntegerLiteral](notational-conventions.html#prod-grammar-notation-HexIntegerLiteral) :: 0 x [HexDigits](ecmascript-language-lexical-grammar.html#prod-HexDigits)

In contrast, in the syntactic grammar, a contiguous run of fixed-width code points is a single terminal symbol.

Terminal symbols come in two other forms:

*   In the lexical and RegExp grammars, Unicode code points without a conventional printed representation are instead shown in the form "<ABBREV>" where "ABBREV" is a mnemonic for the code point or set of code points. These forms are defined in [Unicode Format-Control Characters](ecmascript-language-lexical-grammar.html#sec-unicode-format-control-characters), [White Space](ecmascript-language-lexical-grammar.html#sec-white-space), and [Line Terminators](ecmascript-language-lexical-grammar.html#sec-line-terminators).
*   In the syntactic grammar, certain terminal symbols (e.g. [IdentifierName](ecmascript-language-lexical-grammar.html#prod-IdentifierName) and [RegularExpressionLiteral](ecmascript-language-lexical-grammar.html#prod-RegularExpressionLiteral)) are shown in italics, as they refer to the nonterminals of the same name in the lexical grammar.

5.1.5.2 Nonterminal Symbols and Productions
===========================================

Nonterminal symbols are shown in _italic_ type. The definition of a nonterminal (also called a “production”) is introduced by the name of the nonterminal being defined followed by one or more colons. (The number of colons indicates to which grammar the production belongs.) One or more alternative right-hand sides for the nonterminal then follow on succeeding lines. For example, the syntactic definition:

[WhileStatement](notational-conventions.html#prod-grammar-notation-WhileStatement) : while ( [Expression](ecmascript-language-expressions.html#prod-Expression) ) [Statement](ecmascript-language-statements-and-declarations.html#prod-Statement)

states that the nonterminal [WhileStatement](notational-conventions.html#prod-grammar-notation-WhileStatement) represents the token `while`, followed by a left parenthesis token, followed by an [Expression](ecmascript-language-expressions.html#prod-Expression), followed by a right parenthesis token, followed by a [Statement](ecmascript-language-statements-and-declarations.html#prod-Statement). The occurrences of [Expression](ecmascript-language-expressions.html#prod-Expression) and [Statement](ecmascript-language-statements-and-declarations.html#prod-Statement) are themselves nonterminals. As another example, the syntactic definition:

[ArgumentList](notational-conventions.html#prod-grammar-notation-ArgumentList) : [AssignmentExpression](ecmascript-language-expressions.html#prod-AssignmentExpression) [ArgumentList](notational-conventions.html#prod-grammar-notation-ArgumentList) , [AssignmentExpression](ecmascript-language-expressions.html#prod-AssignmentExpression)

states that an [ArgumentList](notational-conventions.html#prod-grammar-notation-ArgumentList) may represent either a single [AssignmentExpression](ecmascript-language-expressions.html#prod-AssignmentExpression) or an [ArgumentList](notational-conventions.html#prod-grammar-notation-ArgumentList), followed by a comma, followed by an [AssignmentExpression](ecmascript-language-expressions.html#prod-AssignmentExpression). This definition of [ArgumentList](notational-conventions.html#prod-grammar-notation-ArgumentList) is recursive, that is, it is defined in terms of itself. The result is that an [ArgumentList](notational-conventions.html#prod-grammar-notation-ArgumentList) may contain any positive number of arguments, separated by commas, where each argument expression is an [AssignmentExpression](ecmascript-language-expressions.html#prod-AssignmentExpression). Such recursive definitions of nonterminals are common.

5.1.5.3 Optional Symbols
========================

The subscripted suffix “opt”, which may appear after a terminal or nonterminal, indicates an optional symbol. The alternative containing the optional symbol actually specifies two right-hand sides, one that omits the optional element and one that includes it. This means that:

[VariableDeclaration](notational-conventions.html#prod-grammar-notation-VariableDeclaration) : [BindingIdentifier](ecmascript-language-expressions.html#prod-BindingIdentifier) [Initializer](ecmascript-language-expressions.html#prod-Initializer)opt

is a convenient abbreviation for:

[VariableDeclaration](notational-conventions.html#prod-grammar-notation-VariableDeclaration) : [BindingIdentifier](ecmascript-language-expressions.html#prod-BindingIdentifier) [BindingIdentifier](ecmascript-language-expressions.html#prod-BindingIdentifier) [Initializer](ecmascript-language-expressions.html#prod-Initializer)

and that:

[ForStatement](notational-conventions.html#prod-grammar-notation-ForStatement) : for ( [LexicalDeclaration](ecmascript-language-statements-and-declarations.html#prod-LexicalDeclaration) [Expression](ecmascript-language-expressions.html#prod-Expression)opt ; [Expression](ecmascript-language-expressions.html#prod-Expression)opt ) [Statement](ecmascript-language-statements-and-declarations.html#prod-Statement)

is a convenient abbreviation for:

[ForStatement](notational-conventions.html#prod-grammar-notation-ForStatement) : for ( [LexicalDeclaration](ecmascript-language-statements-and-declarations.html#prod-LexicalDeclaration) ; [Expression](ecmascript-language-expressions.html#prod-Expression)opt ) [Statement](ecmascript-language-statements-and-declarations.html#prod-Statement) for ( [LexicalDeclaration](ecmascript-language-statements-and-declarations.html#prod-LexicalDeclaration) [Expression](ecmascript-language-expressions.html#prod-Expression) ; [Expression](ecmascript-language-expressions.html#prod-Expression)opt ) [Statement](ecmascript-language-statements-and-declarations.html#prod-Statement)

which in turn is an abbreviation for:

[ForStatement](notational-conventions.html#prod-grammar-notation-ForStatement) : for ( [LexicalDeclaration](ecmascript-language-statements-and-declarations.html#prod-LexicalDeclaration) ; ) [Statement](ecmascript-language-statements-and-declarations.html#prod-Statement) for ( [LexicalDeclaration](ecmascript-language-statements-and-declarations.html#prod-LexicalDeclaration) ; [Expression](ecmascript-language-expressions.html#prod-Expression) ) [Statement](ecmascript-language-statements-and-declarations.html#prod-Statement) for ( [LexicalDeclaration](ecmascript-language-statements-and-declarations.html#prod-LexicalDeclaration) [Expression](ecmascript-language-expressions.html#prod-Expression) ; ) [Statement](ecmascript-language-statements-and-declarations.html#prod-Statement) for ( [LexicalDeclaration](ecmascript-language-statements-and-declarations.html#prod-LexicalDeclaration) [Expression](ecmascript-language-expressions.html#prod-Expression) ; [Expression](ecmascript-language-expressions.html#prod-Expression) ) [Statement](ecmascript-language-statements-and-declarations.html#prod-Statement)

so, in this example, the nonterminal [ForStatement](notational-conventions.html#prod-grammar-notation-ForStatement) actually has four alternative right-hand sides.

5.1.5.4 Grammatical Parameters
==============================

A production may be parameterized by a subscripted annotation of the form “\[parameters\]”, which may appear as a suffix to the nonterminal symbol defined by the production. “parameters” may be either a single name or a comma separated list of names. A parameterized production is shorthand for a set of productions defining all combinations of the parameter names, preceded by an underscore, appended to the parameterized nonterminal symbol. This means that:

[StatementList](notational-conventions.html#prod-grammar-notation-StatementList)\[Return\] : [ReturnStatement](ecmascript-language-statements-and-declarations.html#prod-ReturnStatement) [ExpressionStatement](ecmascript-language-statements-and-declarations.html#prod-ExpressionStatement)

is a convenient abbreviation for:

[StatementList](notational-conventions.html#prod-grammar-notation-StatementList) : [ReturnStatement](ecmascript-language-statements-and-declarations.html#prod-ReturnStatement) [ExpressionStatement](ecmascript-language-statements-and-declarations.html#prod-ExpressionStatement) [StatementList\_Return](notational-conventions.html#prod-grammar-notation-StatementList_Return) : [ReturnStatement](ecmascript-language-statements-and-declarations.html#prod-ReturnStatement) [ExpressionStatement](ecmascript-language-statements-and-declarations.html#prod-ExpressionStatement)

and that:

[StatementList](notational-conventions.html#prod-grammar-notation-StatementList)\[Return, In\] : [ReturnStatement](ecmascript-language-statements-and-declarations.html#prod-ReturnStatement) [ExpressionStatement](ecmascript-language-statements-and-declarations.html#prod-ExpressionStatement)

is an abbreviation for:

[StatementList](notational-conventions.html#prod-grammar-notation-StatementList) : [ReturnStatement](ecmascript-language-statements-and-declarations.html#prod-ReturnStatement) [ExpressionStatement](ecmascript-language-statements-and-declarations.html#prod-ExpressionStatement) [StatementList\_Return](notational-conventions.html#prod-grammar-notation-StatementList_Return) : [ReturnStatement](ecmascript-language-statements-and-declarations.html#prod-ReturnStatement) [ExpressionStatement](ecmascript-language-statements-and-declarations.html#prod-ExpressionStatement) [StatementList\_In](notational-conventions.html#prod-grammar-notation-StatementList_In) : [ReturnStatement](ecmascript-language-statements-and-declarations.html#prod-ReturnStatement) [ExpressionStatement](ecmascript-language-statements-and-declarations.html#prod-ExpressionStatement) [StatementList\_Return\_In](notational-conventions.html#prod-grammar-notation-StatementList_Return_In) : [ReturnStatement](ecmascript-language-statements-and-declarations.html#prod-ReturnStatement) [ExpressionStatement](ecmascript-language-statements-and-declarations.html#prod-ExpressionStatement)

Multiple parameters produce a combinatory number of productions, not all of which are necessarily referenced in a complete grammar.

References to nonterminals on the right-hand side of a production can also be parameterized. For example:

[StatementList](notational-conventions.html#prod-grammar-notation-StatementList) : [ReturnStatement](ecmascript-language-statements-and-declarations.html#prod-ReturnStatement) [ExpressionStatement](ecmascript-language-statements-and-declarations.html#prod-ExpressionStatement)\[+In\]

is equivalent to saying:

[StatementList](notational-conventions.html#prod-grammar-notation-StatementList) : [ReturnStatement](ecmascript-language-statements-and-declarations.html#prod-ReturnStatement) ExpressionStatement\_In

and:

[StatementList](notational-conventions.html#prod-grammar-notation-StatementList) : [ReturnStatement](ecmascript-language-statements-and-declarations.html#prod-ReturnStatement) [ExpressionStatement](ecmascript-language-statements-and-declarations.html#prod-ExpressionStatement)\[~In\]

is equivalent to:

[StatementList](notational-conventions.html#prod-grammar-notation-StatementList) : [ReturnStatement](ecmascript-language-statements-and-declarations.html#prod-ReturnStatement) [ExpressionStatement](ecmascript-language-statements-and-declarations.html#prod-ExpressionStatement)

A nonterminal reference may have both a parameter list and an “opt” suffix. For example:

[VariableDeclaration](notational-conventions.html#prod-grammar-notation-VariableDeclaration) : [BindingIdentifier](ecmascript-language-expressions.html#prod-BindingIdentifier) [Initializer](ecmascript-language-expressions.html#prod-Initializer)\[+In\]opt

is an abbreviation for:

[VariableDeclaration](notational-conventions.html#prod-grammar-notation-VariableDeclaration) : [BindingIdentifier](ecmascript-language-expressions.html#prod-BindingIdentifier) [BindingIdentifier](ecmascript-language-expressions.html#prod-BindingIdentifier) Initializer\_In

Prefixing a parameter name with “?” on a right-hand side nonterminal reference makes that parameter value dependent upon the occurrence of the parameter name on the reference to the current production's left-hand side symbol. For example:

[VariableDeclaration](notational-conventions.html#prod-grammar-notation-VariableDeclaration)\[In\] : [BindingIdentifier](ecmascript-language-expressions.html#prod-BindingIdentifier) [Initializer](ecmascript-language-expressions.html#prod-Initializer)\[?In\]

is an abbreviation for:

[VariableDeclaration](notational-conventions.html#prod-grammar-notation-VariableDeclaration) : [BindingIdentifier](ecmascript-language-expressions.html#prod-BindingIdentifier) [Initializer](ecmascript-language-expressions.html#prod-Initializer) [VariableDeclaration\_In](notational-conventions.html#prod-grammar-notation-VariableDeclaration_In) : [BindingIdentifier](ecmascript-language-expressions.html#prod-BindingIdentifier) Initializer\_In

If a right-hand side alternative is prefixed with “\[+parameter\]” that alternative is only available if the named parameter was used in referencing the production's nonterminal symbol. If a right-hand side alternative is prefixed with “\[~parameter\]” that alternative is only available if the named parameter was _not_ used in referencing the production's nonterminal symbol. This means that:

[StatementList](notational-conventions.html#prod-grammar-notation-StatementList)\[Return\] : \[+Return\] [ReturnStatement](ecmascript-language-statements-and-declarations.html#prod-ReturnStatement) [ExpressionStatement](ecmascript-language-statements-and-declarations.html#prod-ExpressionStatement)

is an abbreviation for:

[StatementList](notational-conventions.html#prod-grammar-notation-StatementList) : [ExpressionStatement](ecmascript-language-statements-and-declarations.html#prod-ExpressionStatement) [StatementList\_Return](notational-conventions.html#prod-grammar-notation-StatementList_Return) : [ReturnStatement](ecmascript-language-statements-and-declarations.html#prod-ReturnStatement) [ExpressionStatement](ecmascript-language-statements-and-declarations.html#prod-ExpressionStatement)

and that:

[StatementList](notational-conventions.html#prod-grammar-notation-StatementList)\[Return\] : \[~Return\] [ReturnStatement](ecmascript-language-statements-and-declarations.html#prod-ReturnStatement) [ExpressionStatement](ecmascript-language-statements-and-declarations.html#prod-ExpressionStatement)

is an abbreviation for:

[StatementList](notational-conventions.html#prod-grammar-notation-StatementList) : [ReturnStatement](ecmascript-language-statements-and-declarations.html#prod-ReturnStatement) [ExpressionStatement](ecmascript-language-statements-and-declarations.html#prod-ExpressionStatement) [StatementList\_Return](notational-conventions.html#prod-grammar-notation-StatementList_Return) : [ExpressionStatement](ecmascript-language-statements-and-declarations.html#prod-ExpressionStatement)

5.1.5.5 one of
==============

When the words “**one of**” follow the colon(s) in a grammar definition, they signify that each of the terminal symbols on the following line or lines is an alternative definition. For example, the lexical grammar for ECMAScript contains the production:

[NonZeroDigit](notational-conventions.html#prod-grammar-notation-NonZeroDigit) :: one of 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9

which is merely a convenient abbreviation for:

[NonZeroDigit](notational-conventions.html#prod-grammar-notation-NonZeroDigit) :: 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9

5.1.5.6 \[empty\]
=================

If the phrase “\[empty\]” appears as the right-hand side of a production, it indicates that the production's right-hand side contains no terminals or nonterminals.

5.1.5.7 Lookahead Restrictions
==============================

If the phrase “\[lookahead = seq\]” appears in the right-hand side of a production, it indicates that the production may only be used if the token sequence seq is a prefix of the immediately following input token sequence. Similarly, “\[lookahead ∈ set\]”, where set is a [finite](ecmascript-data-types-and-values.html#finite) non-empty set of token sequences, indicates that the production may only be used if some element of set is a prefix of the immediately following token sequence. For convenience, the set can also be written as a nonterminal, in which case it represents the set of all token sequences to which that nonterminal could expand. It is considered an editorial error if the nonterminal could expand to infinitely many distinct token sequences.

These conditions may be negated. “\[lookahead ≠ seq\]” indicates that the containing production may only be used if seq is _not_ a prefix of the immediately following input token sequence, and “\[lookahead ∉ set\]” indicates that the production may only be used if _no_ element of set is a prefix of the immediately following token sequence.

As an example, given the definitions:

[DecimalDigit](notational-conventions.html#prod-grammar-notation-DecimalDigit) :: one of 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 [DecimalDigits](notational-conventions.html#prod-grammar-notation-DecimalDigits) :: [DecimalDigit](notational-conventions.html#prod-grammar-notation-DecimalDigit) [DecimalDigits](notational-conventions.html#prod-grammar-notation-DecimalDigits) [DecimalDigit](notational-conventions.html#prod-grammar-notation-DecimalDigit)

the definition:

[LookaheadExample](notational-conventions.html#prod-grammar-notation-LookaheadExample) :: n \[lookahead ∉ { 1, 3, 5, 7, 9 }\] [DecimalDigits](notational-conventions.html#prod-grammar-notation-DecimalDigits) [DecimalDigit](notational-conventions.html#prod-grammar-notation-DecimalDigit) \[lookahead ∉ [DecimalDigit](notational-conventions.html#prod-grammar-notation-DecimalDigit)\]

matches either the letter `n` followed by one or more decimal digits the first of which is even, or a decimal digit not followed by another decimal digit.

Note that when these phrases are used in the syntactic grammar, it may not be possible to unambiguously identify the immediately following token sequence because determining later tokens requires knowing which lexical [goal symbol](notational-conventions.html#sec-context-free-grammars) to use at later positions. As such, when these are used in the syntactic grammar, it is considered an editorial error for a token sequence seq to appear in a lookahead restriction (including as part of a set of sequences) if the choices of lexical [goal symbols](notational-conventions.html#sec-context-free-grammars) to use could change whether or not seq would be a prefix of the resulting token sequence.

5.1.5.8 \[no [LineTerminator](ecmascript-language-lexical-grammar.html#prod-LineTerminator) here\]
==================================================================================================

If the phrase “\[no [LineTerminator](ecmascript-language-lexical-grammar.html#prod-LineTerminator) here\]” appears in the right-hand side of a production of the syntactic grammar, it indicates that the production is _a restricted production_: it may not be used if a [LineTerminator](ecmascript-language-lexical-grammar.html#prod-LineTerminator) occurs in the input stream at the indicated position. For example, the production:

[ThrowStatement](notational-conventions.html#prod-grammar-notation-ThrowStatement) : throw \[no [LineTerminator](ecmascript-language-lexical-grammar.html#prod-LineTerminator) here\] [Expression](ecmascript-language-expressions.html#prod-Expression) ;

indicates that the production may not be used if a [LineTerminator](ecmascript-language-lexical-grammar.html#prod-LineTerminator) occurs in the script between the `throw` token and the [Expression](ecmascript-language-expressions.html#prod-Expression).

Unless the presence of a [LineTerminator](ecmascript-language-lexical-grammar.html#prod-LineTerminator) is forbidden by a restricted production, any number of occurrences of [LineTerminator](ecmascript-language-lexical-grammar.html#prod-LineTerminator) may appear between any two consecutive tokens in the stream of input elements without affecting the syntactic acceptability of the script.

5.1.5.9 but not
===============

The right-hand side of a production may specify that certain expansions are not permitted by using the phrase “**but not**” and then indicating the expansions to be excluded. For example, the production:

[Identifier](notational-conventions.html#prod-grammar-notation-Identifier) :: [IdentifierName](ecmascript-language-lexical-grammar.html#prod-IdentifierName) but not [ReservedWord](ecmascript-language-lexical-grammar.html#prod-ReservedWord)

means that the nonterminal [Identifier](notational-conventions.html#prod-grammar-notation-Identifier) may be replaced by any sequence of code points that could replace [IdentifierName](ecmascript-language-lexical-grammar.html#prod-IdentifierName) provided that the same sequence of code points could not replace [ReservedWord](ecmascript-language-lexical-grammar.html#prod-ReservedWord).

5.1.5.10 Descriptive Phrases
============================

Finally, a few nonterminal symbols are described by a descriptive phrase in sans-serif type in cases where it would be impractical to list all the alternatives:

[SourceCharacter](notational-conventions.html#prod-grammar-notation-SourceCharacter) :: any Unicode code point